Nick Grokhowsky Comedy and Tragedy Amidst Socrates Kallopolis “While like a ghastly river, / Through the pale door / A hideous throng rush out forever / And laugh – but smile no more (Poe, 67).” This is an excerpt from Edgar Allen Poe’s poem “The Haunted Palace.” The poem proposes two contradictory emotions worth noticing: the emphasis of humor in tragedy and the emphasis of tragedy in humor. The relationship between these feelings is important because the first two social vocalizations children make are sobbing and laughter (Boyd, 5). Both sobbing and laughter are dependent on the mid-brain and brain stem circuits instead of higher speech centers. Additionally, sobbing is produced during inhalation which causes tension. This tension causes painful vocalizations. Whereas laughter is produced during exhalation and it causes a relaxed, effortless, vocalization. Suffering is the general feeling associated with sobbing (Cohen, 90). The general feeling associated with laughter is pleasure (Wells, 1). Hence, the familiar opinion of the two vocalizations, as well as the feelings they institute, are that they are in opposition to one another. This theory, like many others found in western culture, was developed by Aristotle. Yet one might question why these emotions were considered unjust for Socrates. Socrates dismissal of emotions, especially through poetry, is a curious law to enforce in a city based on justice. Therefore an analysis of these emotions basic function will make it evident why Socrates did not want them to influence his Kallopolis. In fact, it will be clear that the reason why

2 Socrates dismissed tragedy and comedy was to eliminate the emotions they produce because they would segregate the polis in a negative way.

Evolutionary Theories Darwin said that weeping seems to be our primary expression of suffering, and that this is best noticed in children (Cohen, 90). The suffering Darwin spoke of includes both bodily pain and mental distress. Darwin clarified his statement about weeping to say, “It is unnecessary to suppose that the child carries anything with it from the time of its birth than this way of indicating the presence of danger” (90). Weeping then is an intrinsic indication of presence of danger found in children. Furthermore the “sucking reflex” has been known to inhibit a child’s response of weeping (90). Therefore the “sucking reflex” tells the child that the risk of danger, from not eating, is no longer present. It is then evident that weeping and the “sucking reflex” are organized patterns of behavior to indicate the risk of not eating (90). In order to further understand weeping as a response to suffering, an experiment was performed with eight healthy babies (90). Both cry vocalizations and the infants motions were recorded in regards to periods of pacification and pacifier withdrawal. The periods of pacification were meant to represent periods of feeding; periods of pacifier withdrawal represented periods of starvation. A microphone was placed from six to eight inches away from the baby’s mouth in order to digitally record any vocalizations made (91). Additionally, a mercury micro-switch was taped on the baby’s left forearm to record flexure of the baby’s elbow. The experiment observed each baby individually. A

3 baby was placed inside their crib thirty minutes before feeding times. They were observed until they had produced a vigorous “hungry” cry – 60 to 80 cry vocalizations per minute and 20 to 50 cry movements per minute. A pacifier was quickly placed in the baby’s mouth during this “hungry” cry. The recorder was reset. When the baby became quiet and motionless the pacifier was removed. The recorder was reset again. The results included that with more experience of pacification the shorter the period of time it took for the baby to become calmed and reduce crying. Behavior patterns during sucking were described as movements of the jaw, swallowing, breathing alterations, the open-eye smooth face, relaxed posture, and reduced activity (99). Opposing, the behavior patterns during crying included particularly replicable vocalizations, specified patterns of breathing, closed-eye cry face, tandem leg kicking, and variable movement of the arms (99). Consequentially crying is understood as a primal response to pain and suffering because of a lack of self-sufficiency. Thus crying is a final attempt to become selfsufficient because of ignorance of the inability to be self-sufficient. The most promising theory of the evolution of laughter is found in the theory of ‘play’ (Boyd, 6). Play is a phenomena found in many animal species from primates and other mammals to birds. However, play puts its players at a temporary disadvantage due to energy expenditure and the increased risk of predation (7). Therefore there must be an evolutionary function for play to have become so widespread. Amongst the many theories for the evolution of play, training for the expected and the unexpected appear to be necessary (7). Training for the expected is easily understood as training for the known future. Boyd gives the example of expecting to hunt during pre-historic times (7). A young boy who throws rocks is preparing to hunt because he is practicing to throw

4 weapons in the future. However training for the expected cannot explain all aspects of play. Training for the unexpected is seen in both human and animal displays of movement during play. These unusual forms of motion test the limits of balance and locomotion which put the participant in a situation where they have no control, but they have the ability to quickly regain control (8). An example of training for the unexpected, as well as the expected is found in social play. Social play involves chasing, mockfighting, tickling, and so on to develop evasion, offensive, and defensive tactics. Therefore it is necessary for animals to have developed a way to determine if one is playing from one who is fighting. The evolutionary development of the relaxed open-mouth face and panting are the elements that distinguish playing from fighting. The relaxed open-mouth face has developed from the rigidity of aggression to the relaxed looseness found in play (8). This distinction of tense composure to relaxed composure is what is used to determine aggressive from non-aggressive behavior. Therefore the development of the relaxed open-mouth face was necessary to determine aggressive from non-aggressive behavior during play. Additionally, panting is a result of intense play that has been ritualized in wolves and dogs, as well as primates (8). Panting has developed from breathlessness due to energy expenditure during play. Panting, according to Boyd, is “a volley of exhalations that together with the ‘play face’ seems the origin of human laughter” (8). Consequentially play is the originator of laughter because play is the activity that created the relaxed open-mouth face, as well as the vocalizations from panting. Play’s evolution of laughter can be further understood as a functional defensive or offensive strategy. Increased defensive and offensive strategies are found in ritual

5 fighting among most species. Ritual fighting is the solution to territory battles, among territorial animals, which include sounds and physical contact (Alcock, 255). Any physical contact rarely ends in death or serious injury, because an animal’s instincts to promote their own race are more influential then their instincts to promote their own individuality. Furthermore, territorial battles do not always involve physical contact (256). The noises that are made during ritualized fighting are designed to make the opponent aware of the animal’s size and endurance. Hence, a stronger animal’s noises should be enough to scare off its competition. This type of situation is what Boyd claims play to be the training for. Thus if play is training for these aggressive situations, then perhaps the vocalizations that evolved from play (laughter) are also training for the vocalizations that occur in these aggressive encounters. An example of ritual fighting among humans can be found in the martial arts. In Tai Chi Chuan its participants perform a form of combat training called Push Hands (Chen, 105). According to Chen, Push Hands is a sort of Tai Chi greeting between new instructors and students. Push Hands is performed by two people, with their hands in contact, alternately using the directions of body energy which serves the ability to discern an opponent’s balance through tactile sensation (Siaw-Voon Sim, 52). Usually within this form of ritual fighting the participants are not injured. Yet injuries can occur if one tries to prove they are more capable then they are. Furthermore, laugher can be understood as a way to increase health. The health benefits offered by laughter are found in Humor Therapy and Laughter Meditation. First, Humor Therapy is the use of laughter to assist in healing both physical and mental illnesses (Wells, 1). Laughter causes a deep sense of relaxation which releases tension in

6 the diaphragm and therefore relieves pressure on the internal organs (2). This deep relaxation stimulates the immune system, reduces stress, and balances the body’s natural energy fields. Laughter Meditation is a way one can relax the body and mind, find one’s center, and create a heightened state of awareness (Sutorious, 368). This form of meditation begins with a five minute stretch and is followed by five minutes of laughter. However it is emphasized that the laughter must come from the belly in order to be in your center (369). In other words the diaphragm must be relaxed in order to laugh through your stomach and naval. The final stage involves five minutes of silence and meditation. Some of the feelings that participants of Laughing Meditation have claimed to have were a deeper sense of relaxation, decrease in pain, and feelings of acceptance (370). The common benefit between Humor Therapy and Laughter Meditation is a sense of deep relaxation. Therefore laughter seems to increase health predominantly through the effects of deep relaxation which leads to other health benefits such as reduced pain, a heightened state of awareness, and reduced stress. Consequentially laughter, a vocalization that is the product of play, is the attempt to be self-sufficient. Play is training for the expected and unexpected, or training for the possibilities of our environment. While training for these possibilities one never looses enough control so that they cannot gain it back. Hence laughter is the vocalization made while in control of the possibilities of one’s environment. Moreover, in a stressful situation the animal or human that can maintain the most relaxation is going to have more control over the situation, and therefore have control over the opponent. This is because

7 relaxation is only available to those who believe they are in control, those who are confident, and those who are ‘playing.’ Additionally because laughter creates relaxation it promotes health. The promotion of health is an attempt to gain longevity, or an attempt to gain control over one’s finite amount of time. Therefore, the relaxed point of view caused by laughter is an attempt to be in control of future possibilities within one’s environment; it is the belief in oneself as being self-sufficient. To conclude, both crying and laughing are vocalizations that contain emotions that are founded on the belief of self-sufficiency. Crying on the one hand is the knowledge of the inability for self-sufficiency, but is ignorant to it. Whereas laughter is the lack of knowledge to our inability to be self-sufficient. Therefore both crying and laughter are attempts to be self-sufficient: crying through ignorance and laughter through a lack of knowledge. Literary Theories The first theories of tragedy and comedy were developed in Aristotle’s Poetics (Golden – 1984, 283). The Poetics are divided into two books. The first book discusses the elements of tragedy where the second discusses the elements of comedy. Unfortunately the second book was lost in antiquity. However, many of the second books arguments can be reconstructed from the first five chapters that precede the first books discussion of tragedy (285). It is because Aristotle based his theory of tragedy on the material found in the first five chapters that we can assume that his theory of comedy is also based on this material (which equally discusses tragedy and comedy). To begin, tragedy is developed on seven components: i) tragedy is a form of mimesis; ii) the object

8 of tragic mimesis is a noble act; iii) the noble action is a complete act; iv) the tragic mimesis is represented in adorned language; v) the tragedy is acted through drama, not narration; vi) the identification of pity and fear are evoked emotions; vii) the identification of a tragic catharsis (286). It is generally accepted that comedy follows the first five components of tragedy, but in the form of ignobility: i) comedy is mimesis; ii) the object of comic mimesis is an ignoble act; iii) the ignoble act is complete; iv) the comic mimesis is represented in adorned language; v) the comedy is acted through drama (286). And because Aristotle holds tragedy to be opposed to comedy we can further understand the next two comic components based on the components of tragedy. Thus the sixth component of tragedy’s evoked emotion, pity and fear, are opposed to comedy’s evoked emotion of indignation. Additionally the seventh component, in opposition to the tragic component, will be the identification of a comic catharsis. The comic catharsis will be the clarification of the emotions of an ignoble action. It will be within the understanding of a tragic and comic catharsis that the ideas of ignorance towards the inability for self-sufficiency and belief in self-sufficiency will be evident. The character of Oedipus, from the tragedy Oedipus Rex, represents a tragic catharsis who ignores his knowledge of the inability to be self-sufficient. This is because there is a universal condition of human existence responsible for pity and fear (Golden – 1962, 58). Oedipus acts as if he can control his life by escaping his destiny and mastering his own fate (Eskin, 274). According to Eskin, “Oedipus is a rationalist, a man who thinks he understands the world and knows how to control it” (274). This is shown in the belief he held that he could solve riddles (275). Oedipus’ rationality is at the root of his ability to solve riddles. Yet his rationality is proven ineffective against the more

9 powerful riddle of the fate the universe has created for him. “This universal condition is the fundamental limitation of the human intellect in dealing with the unfathomable mystery that surrounds divine purpose,” according to Golden (1962, 58). Furthermore, it is within his noble disposition that caused his self-blame, and eventually his self inflicted revenge. And it is his self inflicted revenge that proves his ignorance towards the inability for self-sufficiency. Oedipus, like a baby who realizes there is no food, realizes there is no control over his destiny (no self-sufficiency), and resorts to an act to gain pity as an attempt to gain back his noble control. This is identical to the baby who resorts to an act to gain pity for food. Therefore Oedipus is ignorant of the inability to be selfsufficient. Similarly Strepsiades, from the comedy Clouds, represents a comic catharsis because he believes he is self-sufficient. This is understood by the series of events that Strepsiades takes to get out of debt. Each action he takes throughout the play is ignoble (Golden – 1984, 288). The actions are ignoble because of his constant dependence on others throughout the play, yet because he believes he is orchestrating the actions he feels as if he is in charge. These ignoble acts provoke responses of indignation in his character (288). In fact the climax of indignation is also a moment of “powerful illumination” (289). This illumination is the recovery of Strepsiades “lost rustic innocence.” In other words, Strepsiades realizes that he let his control slip away, like an animal who is playing and let his balance go just to the point where he can quickly regain it. Therefore Strepsiades’ feelings of indignation are because of his loss of balance or control. So he takes it upon himself to regain his control by burning down the Pondertorium.

10 Strepsiades is simply playing – he is preparing for any possibility within his environment. Thus he believes that he is self-sufficient. Based on the evolutionary function of crying and laughter, as well as the tragic and comic theories presented by Aristotle, it is clear why Socrates dismissed poetry and emotions from his Kallopolis. It is understood that the primary emotion of tragedy is pain and suffering represented by crying. Whereas the primary emotion of comedy is indignation represented in laughter. Furthermore both crying and laughter represent emotions that agree with self-sufficiency: crying through ignorance of the inability for self-sufficiency and laughter through lack of knowledge that self-sufficiency is impossible to obtain. Yet Socrates’ entire argument in the Republic opposes selfsufficiency (Reeve, 122). In fact the definition of justice is the division of labor. Perhaps this is because Socrates realized that there is a segregation that occurs between crying and laughter. The segregation begins with the division of laughter, or the group who believe they are superior because of their self-sufficiency. The feeling of superiority is only because they lack the knowledge that they are unable to be self-sufficient. The “superior” group does not realize that they truly are not in control of their possibilities. An example of a member of this group is Strepsiades because he believes he has constant control over his environment even when he does not. Meanwhile a second group is formed as an outcome to the realization of the inability to be self-sufficient. The division of crying is the group who find themselves inferior because of their acknowledgment of their inability to be self-sufficient. The acknowledgement of their inability to be selfsufficient creates ignorance to this inability. The ignorance is shown in their final attempts to regain control by way of their insufficiencies. An example is Oedipus’

11 gouging out his eyes to gain pity. Yet it is when a member of this ‘superior’ group realizes their inability to be self-sufficient, and they make a final attempt to gain control through joining the ranks of the inferior group. Therefore members of the inferior group become controlled by blind leaders of the superior group. In conclusion, crying, as seen in the eyes of evolution and tragic literature, is a realization of our inability to be self-sufficient. However the acts of crying, and the acts of the tragic hero, ignore this realization in order to attempt to regain control. Crying, like Oedipus’ gouging out of his eyes, is a final attempt to become self-sufficient through insufficiency. Opposing is laughter. Laughter, as seen in the eyes of evolution and comic literature, is the belief in self-sufficiency. It is the lack of knowledge that selfsufficiency is not possible. And it is because of these two definitions that Socrates dismisses emotion, and certain forms of poetry, from his Kallopolis. This is most likely because Socrates feared that poetry would create the emotions that could create a division among his citizens. Socrates most notable example of this is when Socrates says that poets distort the views of gods and demi-gods through passionate acts such as crying and laughing (32). It is because the poet depicts gods and demi-gods as humans – they are either acting in ignorance, or acting without knowledge.

12

Works Cited 1. Boyd, Brian. “Laughter and Literature: A Play Theory of Humor” Philosophy and Literature. 28.1. 2004. 1-22 2. Cohen, Donald J. “The Crying Newborn’s Accommodation to the Nipple” Child Development, Vol. 38, No. 1 (1967), 89-100 3. Eskin, Stanley G. “Tristram Shandy and Oedipus Rex: Reflections on Comedy and Tragedy” College English. 4. Golden, Leon. “Aristotle on Comedy” The Journal of Aesthetic and Art Criticism. Vol. 42, No. 3 (1984), 283-290. 5. Golden, Leon “Catharsis” Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philosophy Association. Vol. 93 (1962), 51-60. 6. Poe, Edgar Allen. Complete Tales and Poems. Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. 1992 7. Reeve, C.D.C. Plato’s Republic. Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. 1992 8. Sutorious, Dhyan. “The Transforming Force of Laughter, with Focus on Laughing Meditation” Patient Education and Counseling 26 (1995) 367-371. 9. Wells, Ken R. “Humor Therapy” The Gale Encyclopedia of Alternative Medicine. Farmington Hills, Mich.: Gale Group, 2000.

